So the process of knowing, process of perceiving life.
Process of perceiving subtler dimensions of life.
If this has to happen, one should have a vibrant physical
body.
It's important.
One's nervous system, the neurological system, should be
vibrant, alive, undamaged.
The chronic system should be fully active, balanced.
The mind should be like a stepping stone, not a big
barrier.
Being conscious and other things we will see later.
The fundamental things is to have the right kind of body and
the right kind of mind and the energy and the emotion.
One's nervous system is seriously impaired because of
the way one lives.
The kind of chemistry that you're developing within
yourself moment to moment or the kind of chemistry you're
generating within yourself.
When I say the kind of chemistry today we can test and show you.
We can put you to a blood test and show you 5 minutes of anger.
How much poison do you generate?
25 minutes of anger?
How much poison do you generate?
5 minutes of resentment?
How much poison do you generate?
5 minutes of fear?
How much poison do you generate?
We can actually show it to you with blood work.
Nobody need to show it to you.
You know by your experience, if you go through a bout of anger
or resentment or fear or jealousy after that you don't
seem to perceive anything.
You're going on with your own madness, but you cannot perceive
anything.
Probably for the next few days, if you every day, every day, if
you have such moments in your life, you don't perceive
anything at all.
And you think that's normal.
To be Manda is normal.
There is nobody here who inadvertently, unconsciously,
has not touched the Divine in the sense in moments of extreme
love, joy, ecstasy, blissfulness, just pleasure.
One might have touched it.
Only problem is, none of these things are sustainable.
You're only touch and go, Touch and go.
You can never sustain those things.
Those are only demos.
The real thing cannot be approached like that.
And if it has to sustain, you need to have a body which can
sustain that.
You need to have a nervous system which sustains, sustains.
I am separating physical body and the neurological system
because they're two different things.
Literally, if you can say my body and my brain, obviously
you're saying my body and my neurological system.
Because brain is just the base for your neurological system,
your physical body, your neurological system, your pranic
body.
And this will naturally lead to a certain chemical balance where
acids don't eat up your system if you right now this bunch of
flowers.
If you just do this, your nervous system is capable of
feeling how old the flowers are, how vibrant they are, how dead
they are.
Have they come from a refrigerator or did they
actually come from a Jasmine plant?
All these things you will know if you simply do this.
Oh, sadhguru has yogic powers.
No, don't be so silly.
A bird will know it.
A grasshopper knows it.
Bee knows it.
A cow or almost any other animal knows it.
They know it.
Yes or no.
So it is not.
Do not consider this as some great yoga.
This is just normal as to how your system should be.
Your system can be tuned to regenerate itself with the right
kind of food, right kind of posture, right kind of
breathing, right kind of attitude, right kind of
thoughts, right kind of emotions, right kind of words
that you utter and the right kind of sounds that you hear.
All these things and many more can cultivate a nervous system
which is sensitive, which can sense life around you much
better.
Before we address what is beyond, at least you must be
able to experience the physical world in its totality.
Physical world does not mean just your body.
Physical world just does not mean eating, drinking,
sexuality.
No, There is enormous sensuality in just smelling the flower.
In India, there is an elaborate process of sensuality for
devotees.
They are very sensual, just arranging the flowers.
It's an extraordinarily sensual process.
There is a devotional aspect to it.
It is also very, very sensual just to arrange the flowers
properly.
Have you seen how some of them are doing it?
It is.
It is a love affair, so physical in its grossest means food and
sexuality.
It can be raised to a very subtle level where if you just
not, you're an ecstasis.
Sadhguru sunba Mila DHA nilaye shakti tuka Mila karvelipe
shakti and kanida khani ve shakinis.
And once you have such pleasure just sitting here, you will not
indulge in this and that.
This is not about right and wrong.
This is not about morality.
This is not about going to heaven or hell.
This is about preparing your system so that it is capable of
accessing dimensions of the beyond.
For this you need a right kind of body.
If you are everyday poisoning it with wrong foods, wrong
thoughts, wrong emotions, wrong chemistry and hope something
will happen.
Unfortunately life does not work like that.
Then the only way to make you experience anything is when you
become disembodied.
Yes, our ideas of well-being is always today about fixing your
life the way you want it.
You will see even if you successfully fix the situations,
most of the time it you cannot.
But even if you successfully fix the situation, you will see the
experience of life does not.
Not only does not change, generally it comes down because
once you fix the situation, you fix the situation so that you
can live unconsciously there.
You fix it the way you want it so that you can exist
unconsciously.
This happened to your man.
He was caught in a robbery case where he killed somebody.
So he knew he is going to the electric chair, being in
America.
Then he looked her hand.
He saw the face of a woman.
Jury had a very kind looking face.
At the end of one of the hearings, he went to her and got
2 minutes and spoke to her.
Please somehow reduce my term from murder to manslaughter.
I'm sorry, that's that's a legal language.
There's no woman slaughter, OK?
Because aren't you glad she was hesitating?
Then he pointed her to his lawyer.
So the lawyer later on met her outside the court, gave her a a
very expensive gift.
Fixed it.
Then when the final judgment came, he was given manslaughter
15 years.
He was very happy.
After the judgment, he went to her just before they took him
away and he thanked her profusely.
Thank you very much for getting me manslaughter instead of
murder.
How did you do it?
She said.
It was really difficult.
I somehow managed it.
All the others wanted to acquit you.
So if you want to be in a state where where you internally
momentum moment every moment, absolutely your with that
dimension which is the basis of everything at the same time
externally you can be as normal as normal can be.
Then you need to prepare your body and your mind, your
chemistry, your neurological system, your energy system, all
these things need to be prepared.
How many lifetimes will it take?
It depends how messed up you are.
Even if you're terribly messed up, if you've constantly
generated wrong chemistry and it's eaten into your nervous
system, or you also took some outside help, put outside
chemicals into the system and barely damaged it.
Even then, if you're willing to give it a an absolute attempt
within this lifetime, it's possible almost for everybody
except those who are been pathologically damaged.
They may take more time.
Others are only a question of what is the priority?
Is your investment only 21
minutes per day or 21 hours per
day?
That's a question or somewhere in between.
Depending on that, it's very much possible only because it's
a possibility it's worth talking about.
It's worth making an effort.
If there was number possibility, there is no point about all
this.
So just listening to the right sounds, have you noticed when
you had jarring sounds?
Suppose, let's say you were exposed to a few hours of
jarring sounds of noises of automobiles or machines or
whatever.
Do you notice that day If you come home, you can't perceive
much even about the simple things around you.
Have you noticed this?
Another day you were just sitting at home listening to
some classical music or something, Just the breeze and
whatever that day.
Your neuro system, just bright and alert, can perceive things
much more easily if you consciously take care of these
things to some extent.
To whatever extent life allows for you, if you're an industrial
worker, to do plug your ears and go if you take care of it.
To whatever extent, at least If you're conscious that this noise
is damaging my system, this sound is nurturing my system.
If I utter these sounds, I notice that there is a nurture.
If I utter certain other sounds, I notice there is a damage.
If this comes into you, you will purify the sounds that you
utter.
Maybe you cannot stop the guy who is screaming next to you.
At least you can purify the sound that you utter, because
the maximum impact on you is the sounds that you utter.
So the language becomes very important.
This is a clap of the master for English babies.
So English language.
Nothing wrong, it is just that phonetically it's not there.
Unfortunately, all of us have become more comfortable with
English than any other language that is historical, not by
choice.
So the language phonetically, how it is engineered, a
particular language.
The language may be good, but still different people.
How they utter it still matters.
Any language can be spoken in a beneficial way to yourself or
you can bark out a language.
Have you seen the same language?
For example, the Tamil language, how we speak in Coimbatore, you
go to Chennai, they bark it out.
This is so in every language, certain type of people bark the
language.
Some people speak, some people sing the language.
So what type of sounds you utter are most important.
This is called Vak Shuddhi.
Vak Shuddhi does not mean saying nice things, but uttering the
right sounds.
Whatever sound you need to utter, you utter it in a way
that it's beneficial for you.
And whatever is beneficial for you will naturally be beneficial
for everybody around you.
If a sound is doing wonderful things to you, it will
definitely do the same things to everybody around you.
The sound is an important part.
So is food, so is thought, so is emotion and the practice sadhana
to keep the energies balanced.
If one takes care of this gradually, you will nurture a
body which is capable of perceiving, Oh, can I do it
within my family now?
In a family you cannot do it.
So should I leave my family?
If you leave it also, you cannot do it.
These are things which you do internally, whether you live in
a forest or in a family.
It has nothing to do with those things.
It is something that you do within yourself.
What you do within yourself is nobody's business.
Isn't it HM?
No, no.
Some people around you will make it their business.
But even these little things, if you take home and keep it up,
you will see you will become more perceptive than the way you
are right now.
And that's important, because if you want to experience life
sensitivity, the sensitivity of your perception determines
everything.
It is not something that you can get from a book or somebody's
speech or something else.
This can only be perceived.
Books and people can encourage you, inspire you, guide you, but
still, unless you perceive it is not there.
Only what you perceive is reality, everything else.
No.